---
layout: post
title: Beyond Simulating Item Structure
---

This extends my previous post on [Simulating Likert Items]()

These are some more far-fetched ideas, I still consider worth looking at.


# Cognitive Architecture of Agents

I had done a project previously, in which I was able to produce parameters for [automatically generated items](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automatic_Item_Generation) from a number of [ACT-R](http://act-r.psy.cmu.edu/) [agents](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agent-based_model). 

These agents were learning from a Knowledge Base.

The items were automatically generated items that required the agents to retrieve from their memory factual information they have previously learned by reviewing the data base.

Fact frequency in the KB, as well as the agents exposure to it (implemented as the times an agent has revised the KB - or parts of it) led to different item difficulties and agent abilities.

This result could probably, if not tediously, arrived at analytically. But the aspiration was to extend this solution to harder problems, that required some thinking beyond mere memeory retrieval.

So I tried to do this by providing some Latin grammar operations to the agents.
 
I got so far with this project, and then I had no time, but I have been keeping lots of notes on this ever since, and I decided to put my ideas in more concrete writing in this post.


# Social Networks

The previous simulation featured agents that operated in isolation. 

But people in an actual society don't operate in isolation. Rather they get involved in [communities](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Community_structure) as a function of their membership in families, schools, friend groups, sport clubs etc. (Note that all these are [mesosystems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecological_systems_theory).

# Social Representation vs Social Attitude

So I am so far talking about cognitive Agents, connected by means of a cimmunity topology, interacting with Knowledge Bases equiped with evaluation weights. 

What is missing from the picture for a social psychologist, is the evaluative component. 

Things take part in evaluative relationships, apart from factual ones. Thus, it is not only `isa(a, b)`, but also `is_good(b)`, therefore `is_good(a)`.

A number of KBs may float around in the social space. This reflects the idea that different groups follow different __traditions__, be it professional or otherwise, and these traditions entail both factual and evaluative relations between entities.

[Berne](https://www.worldcat.org/title/structure-and-dynamics-of-organisations-and-groups/oclc/878041471&referer=brief_results )uses the term _euhemerism_ to refer to this. For example, when he and his colleagues visited a psychic, and their adherents, Berne analyzed the situation in terms of the traditions followed by each of the participants: He and his group, were described as descendants of Western Medicine, Hippocrates, and Freud; the psychic and their followers, descendants of hermetic traditions, etc. 

A careful reader would rather talk about mixtures though, since the psychic and followers _are Western_ they don't come from a different representational system, as a teleported ancient Brahman would be for example. This is readily proven by their everyday functioning in modern civilization, and their ability to communicate with people outside the realm of this speicifc interest of theirs.

Because there _is_ a common ground for all participants in a society to talk about any topic they have in common. This is the difference between 'general' and 'specialized' knowledge. This is also a tenet of [Moscovici's early formulation of social representation theory](https://www.worldcat.org/title/psychoanalysis-its-image-and-its-public/oclc/862085564&referer=brief_results).

The attitude is an outcome of this structure. To further the analogy with _mesosytems_ I hinted to above, this structure _is_ the ideological macrosystem.

Note: when another ideological (or in Doise's terms _representational_) macrosystem is vastly different from another, [different social-psychological processes may apply](https://www.worldcat.org/title/levels-of-explanation-in-social-psychology/oclc/924955551&referer=brief_results).

# What kind of Relations

Complex theories may predict a great number of relations between entities. Naive theories perhaps less, but it is still daunting to even thing to make a realistic account.

For starters, I think I will only look into 'equivalence', 'opposition', and 'direct/inverse proportionality' relations.


# Bringing it all back home

Combining all of the above, I think that a fair account of the data we deal with in social and political psychology would be a connected graph of cognitive agents, with factual and evaluative components.

Despite the intuitiveness of this, I don't know of any formal theory that links knowledge bases with the structure of evaluative covariance matrices in the population, and I would like to look into it, as a side project of my PhD.
